---
title: Environment Variables
description: Configuring the API with environment variables
---

The following Environment Variables can be used to configure Prez:
**In most cases all that is required is the SPARQL_ENDPOINT variable.**

These can be set in a '.env' file which will get read in via python-dotenv.
Alternatively, set them directly in the environment from which Prez is run.

An example .env file with the minimum required variables is in the repo as [`.env-required-template`](./.env-required-template), and an example .env file with all possible configuration variables, showing defaults, is in the repo as [`.env-full-template`](./.env-full-template).

## SPARQL Endpoint Configuration

- **`SPARQL_ENDPOINT`**: Read-only SPARQL endpoint for Prez. Default is `None`.
- **`SPARQL_USERNAME`**: A username for the Prez SPARQL endpoint, if required by the RDF DB. Default is `None`.
- **`SPARQL_PASSWORD`**: A password for the Prez SPARQL endpoint, if required by the RDF DB. Default is `None`.
- **`ENABLE_SPARQL_ENDPOINT`**: Whether to enable the SPARQL endpoint. I.e. whether prez exposes the remote repository's SPARQL endpoint (typically a triplestore). Default is `False`. NB the SPARQL endpoint when enabled supports POST requests. Prez itself does not make any updates to the remote repository (e.g. the remote Triplestore), however, if the remote SPARQL endpoint is enabled it is then possible that users can make updates to the remote repository using the SPARQL endpoint.


## Network Configuration

- **`PROTOCOL`**: The protocol used to deliver Prez. Default is `"http"`.
- **`HOST`**: Prez's host domain name. Default is `"localhost"`.
- **`PORT`**: The port Prez is made accessible on. Default is `8000`.

## System URI

- **`SYSTEM_URI`**: The URL where prez is deployed. This is utilised only by the OGC Features API to generate links. Non OGC Features endpoints provided by prez provide prez:link relative links and so do not use this SYSTEM_URI. Default is `f"{protocol}://{host}:{port}"`.

## Logging Configuration

- **`LOG_LEVEL`**: Logging level. Default is `"INFO"`.
- **`LOG_OUTPUT`**: Logging output destination. Default is `"stdout"`.

## Prez Metadata

- **`PREZ_TITLE`**: Title for the Prez instance. Default is `"Prez"`.
- **`PREZ_DESC`**: Description of the Prez instance. Default is a description of the Prez web framework API.
- **`PREZ_VERSION`**: Version of the Prez instance. Default is `None`.

## CURIE Separator

- **`CURIE_SEPARATOR`**: Separator used in CURIEs. Default is `":"`. This separator appears in links generated by Prez, and in turn in URL paths.

## Predicate Configuration
Used for displaying RDF with human readable labels.
- **`LABEL_PREDICATES`**: List of predicates used for labels. Default includes:
    - `skos:prefLabel`
    - `dcterms:title`
    - `rdfs:label`
    - `sdo:name`
> When an annotated (`+anot`) mediatype is used, Prez includes triples for *every* URI in the initial response which has one of the above properties. These annotation triples are then cached. The annotations are used for display purposes, for example HTML pages.
### Description Predicates
Similar to label predicates above.
- **`DESCRIPTION_PREDICATES`**: List of predicates used for descriptions. Default includes:
    - `skos:definition`
    - `dcterms:description`
    - `sdo:description`
### Provenance Predicates
Similar to provenance predicates above.
- **`PROVENANCE_PREDICATES`**: List of predicates used for provenance. Default includes:
    - `dcterms:provenance`

### Other Predicates
The annotation mechanism can further be used to generally return certain properties wherever present.
- **`OTHER_PREDICATES`**: List of other predicates. Default includes:
    - `sdo:color`
    - `reg:status`
    - `skos:narrower`
    - `skos:broader`

## SPARQL Repository Configuration

- **`SPARQL_REPO_TYPE`**: Type of SPARQL repository. Default is `"remote"`. Options are `"remote"`, `"pyoxigraph"`, and `"oxrdflib"`
- **`SPARQL_TIMEOUT`**: Timeout for SPARQL queries. Default is `30`.

## Contact Information

- **`PREZ_CONTACT`**: Contact information for Prez. Default is `None`.

## Prefix Generation

- **`DISABLE_PREFIX_GENERATION`**: Whether to disable prefix generation. **It is recommended to disable prefix generation for large data repositories**, further, it is recommended to always specify prefixes in the `prez/reference_data/prefixes/` directory. Default is `False`.
## Language and Search Configuration

- **`DEFAULT_LANGUAGE`**: Default language for Prez. Default is `"en"`.
- **`DEFAULT_SEARCH_PREDICATES`**: Default search predicates. Default includes:
    - `rdfs:label`
    - `skos:prefLabel`
    - `sdo:name`
    - `dcterms:title`

## Local RDF Directory
Used in conjunction with the Pyoxigraph repo. Specifies a directory (from the repository root) to load into the Pyoxigraph in memory data graph. Not used for other repository types.
- **`LOCAL_RDF_DIR`**: Directory for local RDF files. Default is `"rdf"`.

## Endpoint Structure

- **`ENDPOINT_STRUCTURE`**: Default structure of the endpoints, used to generate links. Default is `("catalogs", "collections", "items")`.

## System Endpoints

- **`SYSTEM_ENDPOINTS`**: List of system endpoints. Default includes:
    - `ep:system/profile-listing`
    - `ep:system/profile-object`

## Listing and Search Configuration

- **`LISTING_COUNT_LIMIT`**: The maximum number of items to count for a listing endpoint. Counts greater than this limit will be returned as ">N" where N is the limit. Default is `100`.
- **`SEARCH_COUNT_LIMIT`**: The maximum number of items to return in a search result. Default is `10`.

## Temporal Configuration

- **`TEMPORAL_PREDICATE`**: The predicate used for temporal properties. Default is `sdo:temporal`.
